README.md, before:

# Snakemake workflow: `<name>`

[![Snakemake](https://img.shields.io/badge/snakemake-≥6.3.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://snakemake.github.io)
[![GitHub actions status](https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/workflows/Tests/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/<owner>/<repo>/actions?query=branch%3Amain+workflow%3ATests)


A Snakemake workflow for `<description>`


## Usage

The usage of this workflow is described in the [Snakemake Workflow Catalog](https://snakemake.github.io/snakemake-workflow-catalog/?usage=<owner>%2F<repo>).

If you use this workflow in a paper, don't forget to give credits to the authors by citing the URL of this (original) <repo>sitory and its DOI (see above).

# TODO

* Replace `<owner>` and `<repo>` everywhere in the template (also under .github/workflows) with the correct `<repo>` name and owning user or organization.
* Replace `<name>` with the workflow name (can be the same as `<repo>`).
* Replace `<description>` with a description of what the workflow does.
* The workflow will occur in the snakemake-workflow-catalog once it has been made public. Then the link under "Usage" will point to the usage instructions if `<owner>` and `<repo>` were correctly set.

Commit message:

initial notes about how to run colora

README.md, after:

# Snakemake workflow: `colora`

[![Snakemake](https://img.shields.io/badge/snakemake-≥6.3.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://snakemake.github.io)
[![GitHub actions status](https://github.com/LiaOb21/colora/workflows/Tests/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/LiaOb21/colora/actions?query=branch%3Amain+workflow%3ATests)


A Snakemake workflow for for genome assembly.

Input files: hifi reads and hic reads.

## Usage

The usage of this workflow is described in the [Snakemake Workflow Catalog](https://snakemake.github.io/snakemake-workflow-catalog/?usage=<LiaOb21>%2F<colora>).

If you use this workflow in a paper, don't forget to give credits to the authors by citing the URL of this (original) <colora> sitory and its DOI (see above).

- place raw hifi reads in /resources/raw_hifi
- place oatk database of interest from github.oatkdb.repo in /resources/oatkDB
- install oatk and make sure it's in your path


How to run `colora`:
```
conda config --set channel_priority flexible # if you want to use conda/mamba otherwise genomescope won't work

snakemake --use-conda --conda-frontend mamba --snakefile workflow/Snakefile --cores all
```

# TODO


* The workflow will occur in the snakemake-workflow-catalog once it has been made public. Then the link under "Usage" will point to the usage instructions if `<owner>` and `<repo>` were correctly set.
